[WIP] Glimmer Components (#1)
pzuraq/emberjs-rfcs: text/0000-glimmer-components.md

The idea was simple: switch to the superior `<angle-bracket>` syntax of web
components, and solve all the other problems! Seems easy enough, right?

As you can imagine, it was _not_ that easy. There was a flurry of discussion on
the original RFC, and many ideas were thrown around. This was seen as the _one_
chance Ember had to "fix" its component API, and the community did not want to
get it wrong and lock us into yet _another_ set of painful papercuts. After much
debate and lots of back and forth with the design, it was ultimately decided
that attempting to redesign components all at once, monolithically, was too
much. Instead, the individual ideas from that discussion could be broken out and
implemented in isolation, in a backwards compatible way, both incrementally
building a new, well thought out component API _and_ laying the groundwork in
the framework for future redesigns.

Many of the features from these discussions which are core to Glimmer
components have already landed in Ember, including: Angle-bracket invocation,
named arguments, element modifiers, and component managers.

> Glimmer components are the final piece of that puzzle. They include the last

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Glimmer components represent the final piece of that's required to enable the "ember octane" programming model. They include the last
```

of the major features that were discussed during the original Angle Brackets

> RFC, and holistically those features make a much simpler and more ergonomic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RFC, and holistically, we feel those features make a much simpler and more ergonomic
```

component API. Taken alone, they are an incremental change. Their individual

> features aren't _that_ much more than what we currently have in Ember today. But

Reviewer: >  aren't _that_ much more than what we currently have in Ember today

that much more _what_? complex? performant?

Author: maybe "aren't _that_ revolutionary compared to what we have in Ember today"?

as a whole they represent the culmination of multiple years of design work and
discussion by the Ember community, and the collective attention to detail and
care of all of our community members.

## Terminology

* The **Glimmer VM** is the underlying rendering engine which is used by
  _Ember.js_ and _Glimmer.js_.
* **Glimmer.js** is a thin wrapper on top of the _Glimmer VM_ which exposes a
  much simpler API compared to Ember. Historically it has been used to prove out
  ideas and implementations before bringing them into Ember via RFC, and has
  been used to write applications which don't require the full feature set of

>   Ember.

Reviewer: Given the level of adoption of Glimmer.js relative to Ember, is it really fair to portray it as

> Historically it has been used to prove out ideas and implementations before bringing them into Ember via RFC

AFAIK this statement is only true in the context of angle-bracket components and named args. A lot of experiments beyond these things have been rolled out in ways that aren't directly usable by anyone other than deep experts (i.e., binary templates, webpack plugins, etc...)

* **Glimmer components** are a newly proposed component API which draw from the
  experimental APIs provided in Glimmer.js, and Ember.js via

>   [sparkles-component](https://github.com/rwjblue/sparkles-component).

Reviewer: Is there any concern around overloading this "glimmer component" term? 

* Glimmer.js has a non-auto-tracked variant
* this RFC proposes an auto-tracked variant
* sparkles-component shoehorns a Glimmer.js-like API on top of ember's "classic" property chain programming model.

The term "Glimmer Component" could easily refer to any one of these three things

* **Classic components** refer to the standard component API at the time of this
  RFC, which have been available in Ember in some form since v1.
* **Tracked properties** refer to a new method of change tracking which is being

>   proposed in a separate RFC, parallel to this one.

Reviewer: + link to RFC

## Motivation

> Glimmer components are a simpler base component class that encourage template

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Glimmer component is a simpler base component class that encourages template
```

> oriented design and thinner class definitions. They are easier to understand in

Reviewer: > encourages template oriented design and thinner class definitions

(taking into account previous conversations w/ @pzuraq)
Currently, the community is pretty divided over the "logic-heavy templates" vs "logic-light templates". Does this RFC represent an effort to push the community more toward template complexity and very simple JS/TS component classes?

> oriented design and thinner class definitions. They are easier to understand in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
oriented design and thinner class definitions. We aim to design them to be easier understand in
```

isolation, and require less knowledge of the framework to use effectively.

This example shows a component written with the classic component API:

```hbs
<!-- templates/components/post.hbs -->
{{#if (eq this.type 'image'}}

>   <img src={{@post.imageUrl}} title={{@post.imageTitle}}/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src={{@post.imageUrl}} title={{@post.imageTitle}}>
```
https://github.com/ember-template-lint/ember-template-lint/blob/master/docs/rule/self-closing-void-elements.md#self-closing-void-elements

{{/if}}

{{@post.text}}
```
```js
// components/post.js
export default Component.extend({
  tagName: 'section',
  classNames: ['post'],
  classNameBindings: ['type'],
  ariaRole: 'region',

  /* Arguments */
  post: null,

  type: readOnly('post.type'),

  didInsertElement() {

>     if (this.type === 'image') {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    this._super(...arguments);
    if (this.type === 'image') {
```

      setupImageOverlay(this.element.querySelector('img'));
    }
  }
});
```

And here is an equivalent component written with the Glimmer component API:

```hbs
<!-- templates/components/post.hbs -->

> <section ...attributes role="region" type={{@post.type}} class="post {{@post.type}}">

Reviewer: Splattributes don't seem to be important in your example. If they're unnecessary, please eliminate them to minimize WTFs.

  {{#if (eq @post.type 'image')}}

>     <img {{did-render this.didInsertImage}} src={{@post.imageUrl}} title={{@post.imageTitle}} />

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if `{{did-render}}` should be called something different. If I remember correctly the timing of this would be "installed on element but not painted". I also don't know if the state of the element is "in-dom". Might be worth checking.

Reviewer 3: @chadhietala 
https://github.com/emberjs/ember.js/blob/88319874d3b8ec2eab92e99de3fc6b48feddf26c/packages/%40ember/-internals/glimmer/tests/integration/components/life-cycle-test.js#L231 (thank you for writing these awesome tests 😃 ), `didRender` is `inDOM` (fully post render).

Author: definitely open to naming suggestions here, it's also different enough from the `didRender` lifecycle hook on classic components that we may want to distinguish it

>     <img {{did-render this.didInsertImage}} src={{@post.imageUrl}} title={{@post.imageTitle}} />

Reviewer: Please consider introducing `{{did-render this.didInsertImage}}` before dropping it in an example. A very basic (i.e., maybe even without lifecycle hooks) example would suffice here

```
```js
// components/post.js
export default class PostComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  didInsertImage(element) {
    setupImageOverlay(element);
  }
}
```

Glimmer components eliminate many of the common paper cuts that cause confusion
with classic components, and align more closely with modern template syntax and
features.

### Outer HTML Semantics

The biggest change Glimmer components make is defaulting to outer HTML
semantics. In the classic component API, components had a implicit wrapper
element. Given this component template:

```hbs
Hello, world!
```

The output by _default_ would be something like:

```html
<!-- OUTPUT -->
<div id="ember-1234" class="ember-view">
  Hello, world!
</div>
```

But we can't know that for sure unless we look at the component definition. If
we do, we might see that the outer wrapping element is actually a `section`, and
it has a `.hello-world` class:

```js
export default Component.extend({
  tagName: 'section',
  classNames: ['hello-world']
});
```
```html
<!-- OUTPUT -->
<section id="ember-1234" class="hello-world ember-view">
  Hello, world!
</section>
```

This behavior means that the template for a component is missing crucial

> information and context. Even for the simplest component, users must check the

Reviewer: In many apps swapping `div` vs. `section` may not be of great consequence.

Might be a more dramatic sell if you make it a `span`; readers may imagine that they thought they'd get `display: block` and now get `display: inline.`

class definition to know with certainty what the full template of the component
is. And unlike bindings, there is no hint to the user that there may be
something dynamic that they should check on - without advanced knowledge of

> Ember's APIs, there is no way of knowing about this behavior.

Reviewer: "tagless" (`tagName: ''`) components deserve a place in this comparative analysis imo

By contrast, Glimmer components have no wrapping outer element - What you see in

> the template is what you get in the output. There is no way to define class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the template is what you get in the output. There is no need to define class
```

names, class name bindings, attribute bindings, or any other DOM element values

> _from the component class_. The template is the single source of truth for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_from the component class_; developers can achieve the equivalent result using the same techniques they're familiar with from working with `Ember.Component` templates. The template is the single source of truth for the
```

output of a component, and any dynamic values are explicitly stated in it.

```hbs
<!-- template.hbs -->
<section class="hello-world">
  Hello, world!
</section>
```

```html
<!-- OUTPUT -->
<section class="hello-world">
  Hello, world!
</section>
```

> We can immediately see that this is a static component with no bindings, no

Reviewer: `static` is a very specific word. I immediately made [this connection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_(keyword))
```suggestion
We can immediately see that this is a simple component with no bindings, no
```

dynamic values, and no meaningful state. Even if there was a component
definition, we know that it is not in any way affecting the output of this
template. Special element ids and classes are also not present, making the
output appear less magical.

> This small change makes a huge difference in the large: users can spend less

Reviewer: I made [this connection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programming_in_the_large_and_programming_in_the_small#Programming_in_the_large) for "in the large"
```suggestion
This micro change makes a macro difference: users can spend less
```

time switching back and forth between reading template and class code, and can
get a better idea of the structure of an app from its declarative templates;
thinner classes are incentivized, guiding users toward putting more of their app
in templates and away from programmatic/imperative style design; and the gap
between template-only components - which are analogous to React and other
frameworks' functional components - and components with a backing class is

> reduced, making them a more viable pattern.

Reviewer: Consider a bulleted list rather than a mega-sentence-paragraph

### Namespaced Arguments

In classic components, arguments are set as properties directly on the class
instance. This means that class methods and properties can be completely
overwritten by incoming arguments, which can have surprising and problematic

> side effects. For example, let's say we have a component that has a

Reviewer: > This means that class methods and properties can be completely
overwritten by incoming arguments, which can have surprising and problematic
side effects.

This isn't always problematic. The same phenomenon can be helpful for default values

```hbs
  {{cart-item price=5.25 }}
  {{cart-item price=1.99 qty=3 }}
```
```js
export default Ember.Component.extend({
   qty: 1,
   total: computed('price', 'qty', function() {
     return this.price * this.qty;
   })
});
```

Author: This is true, and something we should explicitly address in drawbacks.

`getFullName` method:

```js
// components/person.js
export default Component.extend({
  getFullName() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
});
```

Someone may decide they want this component to add middle names to the full
name too. However, instead of updating the component, they decide to override

> the method instead:

Reviewer: In teaching thousands of developers Ember, I've literally never seen someone try to do this, with the exception of something like formatter functions (`x => '$' + x`) that are meant to be passed as arguments.

I feel like it's contrived, to the point of being inappropriate when framed as one of the primary motivating factors for this RFC.

Author: I updated this to be less contrived, but as we noted in conversation, this example is from my own (particularly painful) experience 😄

```hbs
<Person @getFullName={{this.getFullNameWithMiddleName}}>
```

This is clearly a bad pattern, but it shows that in effect, most details of a
component's implementation are not truly private. In most common day-to-day
scenarios, it means that developers have to tread carefully to make sure they
don't accidentally overwrite a critical function or property, and occasionally

> it can be misused.

Reviewer: Again, framing this as a problem that plagues developers "day-to-day" causing them to feel like they must "tread carefully" may be inappropriate. 

I'm totally off base here, please provide me with some examples in real projects so I may correct my misconception.

Glimmer components assign their arguments to the `args` property on their

> instance, preventing namespace collisions from happening in the first place.

Reviewer: Might be worth calling out what happens for 

```hbs
<Person @args={{this.val}}> <!-- this.args.args -->
```
or
```hbs
<Person args={{this.val}}> <!--   <div args="foo"></div>  -->
```

to help the point land RE: namespacing and regular DOM attributes

### Immutable Arguments

> In classic components argument values on the component are also _mutable_. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In classic components values passed into a component are also _mutable_. This
```

can lead to some confusing behavior, because argument values in the _class_ can
change, but named arguments in _templates_ cannot. For instance, given this
component:

```js
// components/welcome.js
export default Component.extend({
  firstName: 'Jen',
  lastName: 'Weber'
});
```
```hbs
<!-- templates/components/welcome.hbs  -->
Hey there, {{@firstName}} {{@lastName}}!

> ```

Author: This example is specifically calling out the discrepancy that people are encountering today, but I'll update some other examples to use auto-reflecting style.

arguments available exclusively on a frozen object, `this.args`. Attempting to
modify `this.args` will hard error, meaning that like templates, users will
always be able to refer to `this.args` as the canonical state of the values
passed to the component invocation.

Immutable arguments make reasoning about the state of a component simpler ("Was
that a user provided value or a default/mutated/computed value?" becomes "Was it
an argument or not?"), and encourages use of `{{@arg}}` syntax in templates
where appropriate. At scale, this makes reading templates even easier, since
more information is encoded in the template itself.

### Minimal Classes

Classic components are _large_ classes, with lots of built up functionality and
debt from over the years. The total list of default properties and hooks
(including inherited ones) includes:

* **13** Standard lifecycle hooks, such as
  `didInsertElement`/`willDestroyElement` and `didUpdate`.
* **29** Event handlers, such as `click`, `mouseEnter`, and `dragStart`.
* **9** element/element customization properties, such as `element` and
  `tagName`.
* **21** standard framework functions, such as `get`/`set`,

>   `addObserver`/`removeObserver` and `toggleProperty`.

Author: I don't think this is aimed at performance particularly, so much as API size. 72 methods/props is a _lot_ to learn.

>   `addObserver`/`removeObserver` and `toggleProperty`.

Reviewer: Is your point that developers must all 72 API items entirely? 

Most folks start off w/ no hooks, maybe `classNames` and build up from there to about a dozen or less items from the API (i.e, `attributeBindings`, `concatenatedProperties`, `classNameBindings`, and many lifecycle hooks are very infrequently used).

In real-world practice, what problem does this "size" impact the developer, how does the smaller "size" of a glimmer component solve it, and how much value does this add to the overall experience?

>   `addObserver`/`removeObserver` and `toggleProperty`.

Author: Which hook should I use to update the component's state based on changes to arguments:

* `didUpdate`
* `didRender`
* `didUpdateAttrs`
* `didReceiveAttrs`

There is no single conventional location for many things. The audits I've been doing drive this home, even experienced Ember developers put things in haphazard locations, for instance manipulating element state in `didReceiveAttrs` after setting it up in `didInsertElement` and tearing it down in `willDestroyElement`. Having too many hooks is problematic, and a large API surface in general causes problems like this.

### Glimmer.js Compatibility

One of the goals for future versions of Ember, post Ember Octane, will be to
enable lighter-weight applications to be built using the framework. Breaking
Ember apart into smaller, fully independent and optional pieces is the core idea
behind the "install your way to Ember" goal, which will enable Ember to be used
in more constrained environments that smaller frameworks such as React, Preact,
Vue, and more excel in. It will also allow users who are size-conscious to adopt
Ember incrementally, adding functionality when it is _needed_ rather than having
all-or-nothing.

This will take time though. Progress has been made, but parts of Ember are still
monolithic. And while it isn't Ember, Glimmer.js is a lightweight wrapper of the
Glimmer VM that enables users to drop that weight and begin writing much more
minimal apps today.

Glimmer components aren't just based on the Glimmer.js component API - they are
one and the same. They will be a shared package, which will be importable and
usable by the users of both frameworks. Not only will users be able to write
better components in Ember, those components will also be cross-compatible with

> Glimmer apps (assuming they don't use Ember specific functionality).

Author: I think it is something we should enable, and I don't believe we would _need_ to do more work to enable it. I do think Glimmer.js needs some work to make it slightly more usable - specifically, it needs work in the cli-front, and the service injection and registration front - but Glimmer components should be cross compatible OOTB with the current design.

was accepted and opened up additional design possibilities. However, they serve
as valuable data points for the viability of a simpler component API, and inform
the design accordingly.

## Detailed design

Glimmer components have the following interface:

```ts
interface GlimmerComponent<T = object> {
  args: T;

  isDestroying: boolean;
  isDestroyed: boolean;

  constructor(owner: Owner, args: T): void;

  didUpdateArgs(): void;
  willDestroy(): void;
}
```

In addition, two new element modifiers will fill in the gaps left by the
`didInsertElement`, `didRender`, and `willDestroyElement` lifecycle hooks:

* `{{did-render}}`
* `{{will-destroy}}`

### Constructor

The constructor for Glimmer components receives two arguments: The owner
instance and the named arguments object. Both of these arguments should
conventionally be passed to `super` immediately, and then accessed through
decorated service properties, `getOwner`, and `this.args`:

```js
class PersonComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @service profile;

  constructor() {
    super(...arguments);

    let owner = getOwner(this);
    let profileService = this.profile;

>     let firstName = this.args.firstName;

Author: Class field initializers _must_ happen after the call to `super`, there is no way to trigger them before that. The instance is guaranteed to be fully setup. We can add an assertion if users do not pass arguments to super, if we want some extra safety there.

  }
}
```

These arguments are passed to the constructor so that they can be used for
initial setup of the component. Service injections and args being available in
this way also makes them available to class field initializers, which can be
useful:

```js
class PersonComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @service time;

  // Use the values of args in an initializer
  fullName = `${this.args.firstName} ${this.args.lastName}`;

  // Access a service in an initializer

>   currentTime = this.time.now();

Author: Initialized values are available after the call to `super()` in the constructor, if I'm reading the first part of what you're saying correctly, so that should not be an issue.

We should absolutely touch on the nuances of classes in the learning model, I will call this out in the "How we teach this" section.

* `{{did-render}}`
* `{{will-destroy}}`

### Constructor

The constructor for Glimmer components receives two arguments: The owner
instance and the named arguments object. Both of these arguments should
conventionally be passed to `super` immediately, and then accessed through
decorated service properties, `getOwner`, and `this.args`:

```js
class PersonComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @service profile;

  constructor() {
    super(...arguments);

    let owner = getOwner(this);
    let profileService = this.profile;

    let firstName = this.args.firstName;
  }
}
```

These arguments are passed to the constructor so that they can be used for
initial setup of the component. Service injections and args being available in
this way also makes them available to class field initializers, which can be
useful:

```js
class PersonComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @service time;

  // Use the values of args in an initializer
  fullName = `${this.args.firstName} ${this.args.lastName}`;

  // Access a service in an initializer
  currentTime = this.time.now();
}
```

The `args` argument will be shallowly frozen in development mode to prevent users

> from trying to modify them.

Author: We could use a proxy too to catch attempts to mutate and throw a real error.

> from trying to modify them.

Reviewer 3: @mike-north Not sure what you mean there, you definitely get an error if you attempt to mutate a frozen object.

Toss this into your chrome console to confirm:

```js
(() => {
  'use strict';
  let foo = Object.freeze({});
  foo.bar = 'lolboom';
})();
```

Will throw:

```
VM144:4 Uncaught TypeError: Cannot add property bar, object is not extensible
    at <anonymous>:4:11
    at <anonymous>:5:3
```

declaratively on the element:

```hbs
<div {{did-render this.setupElement}} ...attributes>
  First root element
</div>
<div {{did-render this.setupElement}}>
  Second root element
</div>
```

This allows users to target which elements they care about directly. It also
allows for code to be run on elements which are contained in conditionals,
meaning users do not need to add messy logic to track component state
themselves:

```hbs
{{#if shouldRender}}
  <div
    {{did-render this.setupElement}}
    {{will-destroy this.teardownElement}}
  >

  </div>
{{/if}}
```

Finally, it means that users can bypass component code altogether by using
helpers:

```hbs
<div {{did-render setScrollPosition @scrollPosition}}></div>
```

This RFC proposes adding two element modifiers: `{{did-render}}` and
`{{will-destroy}}`.

#### `{{did-render}}`

This modifier runs immediately after the element is inserted, and again whenever
any of the arguments passed to it update, including the function passed as the
first argument. It has the following timing semantics:

* **Always**
  * called _after_ the enclosing component's `didUpdateArgs` hook
  * called _after_ any child element's `{{did-render}}` modifiers

>   * called in definition order in the template

Reviewer: I can imagine some common footgun factor here, regarding refactoring templates (traditionally affecting only the _structure_ of the component and never the _behavior_) affecting the order of modifiers firing. 

If I were leading a team, I'd want people to author any "modifier-based hooks" as if there's no guaranteed order

Author: Added a section to learning that calls out that we should not focus on ordering, and that best practices for modifiers are to be commutative (order-independent)

  argument changes for any values that can be computed directly via getters.
  Ideally, most logic for derived state is conventionally in tracked or computed
  properties.
* `didUpdateArgs` is the place to react to argument changes that don't fit into
  getters. This includes asynchronous calls, conditional changes (e.g. if an arg
  changed, do X, else do nothing), etc.
* `willDestroy` is the correct place for all teardown code, like in classic
  components.
* `didReceiveAttrs`, `willRender`, and `didRender` code should be extracted into
  functions which are then passed to `{{did-render}}`
* `willDestroyElement` code should be extracted into functions which are then
  passed to `{{will-destroy}}`

**Element modifiers** will be new to almost everyone, and this will have to be
a primary focus in learning. The bullet points for these are:

* They are conceptually like the render lifecycle hooks on classic components,
  but they run on elements instead of components.
* `{{did-render}}` is similar to the `didRender` lifecycle hooks in classic
  components. It will run when the element is inserted, and then it will run

>   again when any of its _args_ change.

Reviewer: We will need a very specific focus on how `didInsertElement` (the most commonly customized component lifecycle hook) logic should be ported to `{{did-render}}`

Author: Absolutely, I call this out in the learning section, this is a case we should focus on particularly.

>   again when any of its _args_ change.

Reviewer: I have some concerns about the relative complexity of patterns like the twitter bootstrap 3 tabs. It may grow significantly relative to the classic `didInsertElement` way of doing things.

Developers create a HTML structure like

```html
<!-- Nav tabs -->
  <ul class="nav nav-tabs" role="tablist">
    <li role="presentation" class="active"><a href="#home" aria-controls="home" role="tab" data-toggle="tab">Home</a></li>
    <li role="presentation"><a href="#profile" aria-controls="profile" role="tab" data-toggle="tab">Profile</a></li>
    <li role="presentation"><a href="#messages" aria-controls="messages" role="tab" data-toggle="tab">Messages</a></li>
    <li role="presentation"><a href="#settings" aria-controls="settings" role="tab" data-toggle="tab">Settings</a></li>
  </ul>

  <!-- Tab panes -->
  <div class="tab-content">
    <div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane active" id="home">...</div>
    <div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="profile">...</div>
    <div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="messages">...</div>
    <div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="settings">...</div>
  </div>
```
and then run (w/ optional jQuery enabled)
```js
$('#myTabs a').click(function (e) {
  e.preventDefault()
  $(this).tab('show')
})
```

We have two sibling elements that sort of relate to eachother, and are "activated" by some foreign JS plugin. It doesn't feel entirely correct to put a modifier-based hook on either `<ul class="nav nav-tabs" role="tablist">` or `<div class="tab-content">` since it's the pair of them that's important, and neither is the parent of the other.

Is our answer here to add a wrapping element for the sole purpose of having a common parent of the two siblings which must be set-up/destroyed together?

Author: I think in this case it would make sense to place the modifier on just the tabs, since they are controlling the content, and the modifier would be setting up the control. A wrapping div would not be necessary, though if users felt it made more sense they could use it.

>   again when any of its _args_ change.

Reviewer: In moving rendering lifecycle hooks out of the JS/TS module and into the template (attached to elements), we make development of element-less components more challenging.

Example: `ember-google-maps` allows a declarative google maps configuration to be built in handlebars w/ syntax like

```hbs
{{#g-map lat='51.508530' lng='-0.076132' zoom=10 as |g|}}
  {{#each locations as |l|}}
    {{g.marker lat=l.lat lng=l.lng onClick=(action 'showDetails' l)}}
  {{/each}}
{{/g-map}}
```
Only the outer-most component renders anything (a single element -- a `<div>` I think) -- all of its children serve the purpose a declarative DSL for describing JavaScript calls to the gmaps API.

How will projects like these implement post-render behavior for these inner-components while having no DOM elements?

Author: Looking at `ember-google-maps` code, there is exactly one use of `didRender`, which is for the overlay components. This does seem like a valid use case, but based on this and the code in `ember-leaflet` I don't believe it is that very common as is, and it is not the case we should be optimizing for, even for element-less components.

In cases where users _do_ need this functionality, such as the overlay, I think it would be perfectly reasonable to use a custom component manager to add a `didRender` hook. This could even be distributed as a `render-detector` component, like the one being used in `ember-google-maps`.

Author: I actually think this would be a better suited job for a [ResizeObserver](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2016/10/resizeobserver) actually, the main thing they want is to detect when the content's size has changed, not when it has rerendered.

* `{{did-render}}` will _not_ render when sub-elements or contents of the

>   element change. If users need to react to changes in content, they should pass

Reviewer: This again throws a wrench in the "zero DOM components" story. These components may _absolutely_ want some sort of "my children just changed" hook that doesn't require new attrs to be passed in from the outside (i.e., maybe inner components are changing their own state and re-rendering due to the google maps API returning some data)

Author: In looking at `ember-leaflet` and the way it works internally, I don't believe that is the case. It seems to manage most of its own state, and actually implements its own hooks. I've addressed this locally and added an example which reproduces `ember-leaflet` in a minimal fashion, will be pushing shortly.

discussion by the Ember community, and the collective attention to detail and
care of all of our community members.

## Terminology

* The **Glimmer VM** is the underlying rendering engine which is used by
  _Ember.js_ and _Glimmer.js_.
* **Glimmer.js** is a thin wrapper on top of the _Glimmer VM_ which exposes a
  much simpler API compared to Ember. Historically it has been used to prove out
  ideas and implementations before bringing them into Ember via RFC, and has
  been used to write applications which don't require the full feature set of
  Ember.
* **Glimmer components** are a newly proposed component API which draw from the
  experimental APIs provided in Glimmer.js, and Ember.js via
  [sparkles-component](https://github.com/rwjblue/sparkles-component).
* **Classic components** refer to the standard component API at the time of this
  RFC, which have been available in Ember in some form since v1.
* **Tracked properties** refer to a new method of change tracking which is being
  proposed in a separate RFC, parallel to this one.

## Motivation

Glimmer components are a simpler base component class that encourage template

> oriented design, thinner class definitions, and functional/composable component

Reviewer 4: Beyond this sentence, I don't see any further discussion of composable design. If we are going to mention that, I think we probably need to discuss it a bit since I don't think it will be obvious to most readers. But, I don't know how important this is to the overall motivation and if we even need to mention it here.

design. They are easier to understand in isolation, and require less knowledge
of the framework to use effectively.

This example shows a component written with the classic component API:

```hbs
<!-- templates/components/post.hbs -->

> {{#if (eq this.type 'image'}}

Reviewer 4: What's the rationale for making this `this.type` with a computed property, vs. `this.post.type`? That seems like the most semantically close to the Glimmer component example below.

Author: We do need to add the alias to the class for the class name binding, which was what I was trying to demonstrate. Agree we should align all usages of the alias thouh

  <img src={{@post.imageUrl}} title={{@post.imageTitle}}/>
{{/if}}

{{@post.text}}
```
```js
// components/post.js
export default Component.extend({
  tagName: 'section',
  classNames: ['post'],
  classNameBindings: ['type'],

>   ariaRole: 'region',

Reviewer 5: tiny note- section already has the role of region by default, so it doesn't need to be explicitly defined. Reference: https://www.w3.org/WAI/PF/aria/roles#region

Author: I actually meant to ask you if the aria stuff made sense, but forgot. What would a good role for this be you think? Something to demo the old attribute bindings vs the new outer HTML semantics

  /* Arguments */
  post: null,

  type: readOnly('post.type'),

  didInsertElement() {

>     if (this.post.type === 'image') {

Reviewer 4: If we keep the `type` computed property, this should probably be `this.type` as well like with the templates. (Or change them both to be `this.post.type`.)

      setupImageOverlay(this.element.querySelector('img'));
    }
  }
});
```

And here is an equivalent component written with the Glimmer component API:

```hbs
<!-- templates/components/post.hbs -->
<section ...attributes role="region" type={{@post.type}} class="post {{@post.type}}">
  {{#if (eq @post.type 'image')}}
    <img {{did-render this.didInsertImage}} src={{@post.imageUrl}} title={{@post.imageTitle}} />
  {{/if}}

  {{@post.text}}
</section>
```
```js
// components/post.js
export default class PostComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  didInsertImage(element) {
    setupImageOverlay(element);
  }
}
```

Glimmer components eliminate many of the common paper cuts that cause confusion
with classic components, and align more closely with modern template syntax and
features.

### Outer HTML Semantics

The biggest change Glimmer components make is defaulting to outer HTML
semantics - What You See Is What You Get, in templates. In the classic component
API, components had a implicit wrapper element. Given this component template:

```hbs
Hello, world!
```

The output by _default_ would be:

```html
<!-- OUTPUT -->

> <div>

Reviewer 4: Worth including the `id="ember-1234"` and `class="ember-view"` gunk here? That adds to the problem, and the overall noisiness, quite a bit.

  Hello, world!
</section>
```

This behavior means that the template for a component is missing crucial
information and context. Even for the simplest component, users must check the
class definition to know with certainty what the full template of the component
is. And unlike bindings, there is no hint to the user that there may be
something dynamic that they should check on - without advanced knowledge of
Ember's APIs, there is no way of knowing about this behavior.

By contrast, Glimmer components have no wrapping outer element. There is no way
to define class names, class name bindings, attribute bindings, or any other DOM
element values. The template is the single source of truth for the output of a
component, and any dynamic values are explicitly stated in it.

```hbs
<!-- template.hbs -->
<section class="hello-world">
  Hello, world!
</section>
```

```html
<!-- OUTPUT -->
<section class="hello-world">
  Hello, world!
</section>
```

We can immediately see that this is a static component with no bindings, no
dynamic values, and no meaningful state. Even if there was a component
definition, we know that it is not in any way affecting the output of this

> template (though it could be "side-effecting" and changing state elsewhere).

Reviewer 4: Is this aside about "side-effecting" needed to understand the overall point about the template being static? Without an example or explanation, I feel like this could cause confusion.

Author: Just being (overly) thorough, I think we can remove it.

This small change makes a huge difference in the large: users can spend less
time switching back and forth between reading template and class code, and can
get a better idea of the structure of an app from its declarative templates;
thinner classes are incentivized, guiding users toward putting more of their app
in templates and away from programmatic/imperative style design; and the gap
between template-only components - which are analogous to React and other

> framework's functional components - and components with a backing class is

Reviewer 4: s/framework's/frameworks'/

export default Component.extend({
  firstName: 'Jen',
  lastName: 'Weber'
});
```
```hbs
<!-- templates/components/welcome.hbs  -->
Hey there, {{@firstName}} {{@lastName}}!
```

And this invocation:

```hbs
<Welcome />
```

You might expect that the result would be:

```hbs
Hey there, Jen Weber!
```

However, `{{@firstName}}` and `{{@lastName}}` would actually be empty values.
They refer _directly_ to the arguments passed into the _invocation_ of the
component, and to get the results we wanted, we would have to invoke it like so:

```hbs
<Welcome @firstName="Jen" @lastName="Weber" />
```

The advantage in this is that named arguments are fully transparent. When seen
in a template, users can know without a doubt that the named argument was a
value passed in from the invocation. Likewise, when they see a standard binding
to a value like `{{this.firstName}}`, they know this is a value defined on the
component - it could a computed property, it could come from a service, it could
be a random value, but it is _not_ an argument.

Glimmer components align their argument access with named args by making
arguments available exclusively on a frozen object, `this.args`. Attempting to

> modify `this.args` or will hard error, meaning that like templates, users will

Reviewer 4: Or?

Immutable arguments make reasoning about the state of a component simpler ("Was
that a user provided value or a default/mutated/computed value?" becomes "Was it
an argument or not?"), and encourages use of `{{@arg}}` syntax in templates
where appropriate. At scale, this makes reading templates even easier, since
more information is encoded in the template itself.

### Minimal Classes

Classic components are _large_ classes, with lots of built up functionality and
debt from over the years. The total list of default properties and hooks
(including inherited ones) includes:

* **13** Standard lifecycle hooks, such as
  `didInsertElement`/`willDestroyElement` and `didUpdate`.
* **29** Event handlers, such as `click`, `mouseEnter`, and `dragStart`.
* **9** element/element customization properties, such as `element` and
  `tagName`.
* **21** standard framework functions, such as `get`/`set`,
  `addObserver`/`removeObserver` and `toggleProperty`.

Coming from a class hierarchy that is 4 levels deep (`Component` -> `CoreView`
-> `EmberObject` -> `CoreObject`, with about 19 mixins included along the way).

This is a _large_ API surface to become acquainted with, and namespace

> collisions are _not_ uncommon with new Ember user's - collisions on `destroy`

Reviewer 4: s/user's/users/

were the original reason for adding the `actions` object to classes, and every
so often a user will pop in on `#help` wondering why their `click` or `submit`
methods trigger automagically. Even putting aside the possibility of collisions,

> the sheer amount of choice can sometimes be parallizing: Do I put my

Reviewer 4: s/parallizing/paralyzing/

`click` handler? Which update method should I use - `didRender`, `didUpdate`,
`didReceiveAttrs`?

Glimmer components have a constructor, **2** lifecycle hooks, and **3**
properties. They don't extend from any classes, themselves being a simple native
class. They don't have any element/DOM based properties, hooks, event handler
functions, whose responsibilities have been passed on to element modifiers. This
_dramatically_ simplifies what users need to learn in order to start using the
bread-and-butter class of Ember, and once again encourages _thin_, template
oriented components.

### Glimmer.js Compatibility

One of the goals for future versions of Ember, post Ember Octane, will be to
enable lighter-weight applications to be built using the framework. Breaking
Ember apart into smaller, fully independent and optional pieces is the core idea
behind the "install your way to Ember" goal, which will enable Ember to be used
in more constrained environments that smaller frameworks such as React, Preact,
Vue, and more excel in. It will also allow users who are size-conscious to adopt
Ember incrementally, adding functionality when it is _needed_ rather than having
all-or-nothing.

> This will take time though. Much progress has been made, but parts of Ember are

Reviewer 4: I think we can tone down the superlatives here—very, much, etc.

motivated the [component manager
RFC](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/blob/master/text/0213-custom-components.md),
which enabled experimentation in Ember directly, and set us up for having
multiple implementations of component APIs which were interchangeable.

As such, we now have two reference implementations which can be referred to:

* [Glimmer.js](https://glimmerjs.com/), the framework that this component API is
  based on, and will be cross-compatible with.
* [sparkles-component](https://github.com/rwjblue/sparkles-component), an an
  implementation of the Glimmer.js component API using Ember's component
  managers. It is usable in Ember today.

Both of these have minor differences from the API proposed in this RFC, mainly
because they were made before the [element modifiers
RFC](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/blob/master/text/0373-Element-Modifier-Managers.md)
was accepted and opened up additional design possibilities. However, they serve
as valuable data points for the viability of a simpler component API, and inform
the design accordingly.

## Detailed design

Glimmer components have the following interface:

```ts

> interface GlimmerComponentt {

Reviewer 4: Seems like this should be generic over `args`?

Reviewer 3: `GlimmerComponentt` -> `GlimmerComponent`

Reviewer 3: > Seems like this should be generic over args?

FWIW, @mike-north and I went with a generic + default in sparkles-component.

```ts
interface Component<T = object> {
  args: T;
  constructor(owner: Owner, args: T): void;

  didInsertElement(): void;
  didUpdate(): void;
  
  willDestroy(): void;
}
```

  args: unknown;

  isDestroying: boolean;
  isDestroyed: boolean;

  constructor(owner: Owner, args: unknown): void;

  didUpdateArgs(): void;
  willDestroy(): void;
}
```

In addition, two new element modifiers will fill in the gaps left by the
`didInsertElement`, `didRender`, and `willDestroyElement` lifecycle hooks:

* `{{did-render}}`
* `{{will-destroy}}`

### Constructor

The constructor for Glimmer components receives two arguments: The owner
instance and the named arguments object. Both of these arguments should
conventionally be passed to `super` immediately, and then accessed through

> decorated service properties, `getOwner`, and `this.args` respectively:

Reviewer 4: This says "respectively" but one list has two items and the other has three? How do these line up?

Author: Originally it just said `getOwner` and `this.args`, respectively doesn't make sense anymore

```js
class PersonComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @service profile;

  constructor() {
    super(...arguments);

    let owner = getOwner(this);
    let profileService = this.profile;

    let firstName = this.args.firstName;
  }
}
```

These arguments are passed to the constructor so that they can be used for
initial setup of the component. Since Glimmer components do not have an `init`
hook, and they do not have `willRender`/`willInsertElement`, the constructor is

> only method for setting up the initial state of the component before the first

Reviewer 4: This is true, but we should motivate that design so it doesn't seem like an arbitrary restriction.

Specifically, we want to encourage people to model initialization via getters (and tracked getters, if the value changes over time). This helps avoid expensive upfront initialization, and switches to a "pull-based" model of initialization that only does computation for values that are actually needed in the current rendering pass.

   * `didReceiveAttrs`
   * `willRender`
   * `didRender`.

2. **Rerenders and Updates:**
   * `didReceiveAttrs`
   * `didUpdateAttrs`
   * `willUpdate`
   * `didUpdate`
   * `willRender`
   * `didRender`

3. **Destruction:**
   * `willDestroyElement`
   * `didDestroyElement`
   * `destroy`
   * `willDestroy`

Many of these hooks have overlapping or redundant functionality, and it's fairly
confusing when to use which and what the differences are. We can simplify this
cycle in a number of ways:

* Hooks that run during multiple phases such as `didRender` and
  `didRecieveAttrs` can be convenient at times, but also add mental overhead and
  redundancy. We can remove these in favor of clearly delineated hooks which
  only run during _one_ phase.

* "Bookend" methods (`did*` and `will*`) can be confusing, since they require
  some specific knowledge of what the "bookended" functionality is. For
  instance, users almost _always_ want to use `didInsertElement` and
  `willDestroyElement`, but the existence of their opposite bookends can make
  this confusing. Additionally, the fact that `didReceiveAttrs` and
  `didUpdateAttrs` do _not_ have opposing bookends is inconsistent with this

>   pattern.

Reviewer 4: For me, the biggest motivation is to nudge people away from a programming model where lots of work is done eagerly, imperatively in response to events. This is really about moving components to a pull-based model where computation happens as a side-effect of its use, in addition to avoiding the runtime overhead of having to check for and invoke so many hooks. It adds up.

Author: This is true, but I think people may shy away from this line of reasoning because it's "what we had before" the hooks, and it was painful at times. I think pointing out the amount of redundancy is a stronger argument because it means nobody is "losing" anything, but I'll add another bullet point which discusses the benefits of using getters over imperative code in hooks.

* Hooks which are used to manipulate elements or the DOM in general can be
  removed in favor of element modifiers, which are discussed in detail in the
  next section.

> Based on these considerations, we can reduce these hooks to one per major phase

Reviewer 4: Taking component instantiation out of the container may solve the problem, but the existence of `destroy()` on an object is an implicit protocol in a few places IIRC. We should make sure someone who has a `destroy()` action on a Glimmer component doesn't inadvertently get it called when the component is destroyed.

(You can close this comment, just an FYI with no impact on the document. 😄 )

Reviewer 3: FYI - @pzuraq and I chatted through this quite a bit, destruction should _only_ be done by the component manager.

Below is a strawman that shows how we can ensure that the proper guarantees  are met without having to explicitly add a `destroy()` method:

```js
export default class Component {
  // other hooks and stuff here

  constructor(owner, args) {
    setOwner(this, owner);
    this.args = args;
    this.isDestroying = false;
    this.isDestroyed = false;
  }

  willDestroy() {}
}

export default class Manager {
  // ...snip...
  destroyComponent(bucket) {
    let { component } = bucket;
    let m = peekMeta(component);
   
    m.setSourceDestroying();
    component.isDestroying = true;

    schedule('actions', component, component.willDestroy);
    schedule('destroy', component, scheduledDestroy, component, m);
  }
}

function scheduledDestroy(component, m) {
  if (m.isSourceDestroyed()) {
    return;
  }
  m.destroy();
  m.setSourceDestroyed();
  component.isDestroyed = true;
}
```

  First root element
</div>
<div {{did-render this.setupElement}}>
  Second root element
</div>
```

This allows users to target which elements they care about directly. It also
allows for code to be run on elements which are contained in conditionals,
meaning users do not need to add messy logic to track component state
themselves:

```hbs
{{#if shouldRender}}
  <div
    {{did-render this.setupElement}}
    {{will-destroy this.teardownElement}}
  >

  </div>
{{/if}}
```

Finally, it means that users can bypass component code altogether by using
helpers:

```hbs
<div {{did-render setScrollPosition @scrollPosition}}></div>
```

This RFC proposes adding two element modifiers: `{{did-render}}` and
`{{will-destroy}}`.

#### `{{did-render}}`

This modifier runs immediately after the element is inserted, and again whenever
any of the arguments passed to it update, including the function passed as the
first argument. It has the following timing semantics:

* **Always**
  * called _after_ the enclosing component's `didUpdateArgs` hook
  * called _after_ any child element's `{{did-render}}` modifiers
  * called in definition order in the template
* **May or May Not**

>   * be called in the same tick as DOM insertion

Reviewer 4: Seems tricky to say this isn't guaranteed in practice, since changing it later will almost certainly break app code, right?

Reviewer 4: Relatedly, there are different use cases for accessing a DOM element before layout and after layout. If you want to do some kind of setup or initialization (e.g. a jQuery UI control), you want to do it before layout/paint to ensure there's no ugly flash of empty content. But if you want to do some sort of measurement (some behavior based on the element's natural width or height, for example) you want to do this after layout.

Today people typically have to learn about `afterRender` if they want the post-insertion, post-layout element. Would this be better modeled as a different element modifier/lifecycle hook?

Reviewer 3: @tomdale if what you are doing is based on the DOM, you should be using the element modifiers which _do_ give you the guarantees that you are mentioning...

Reviewer 2: I don't think there is anything to debate here... we merged the RFC that specified the timing of this.

The modifiers are installed pre-layout. This is why I'm unsure about calling this `{{did-render}}`. The modifier installation is [scheduled](https://github.com/glimmerjs/glimmer-vm/blob/e838d9dd02c41d4c57c14e47ac4ce5f5d89a48dc/packages/%40glimmer/runtime/lib/environment.ts#L192-L198) and is called from bottom-up in the commit of the render transaction. Because of this I'm not sure if `{{did-insert}}` is any better because you "inserting the modifier" not the element. 

If you wanted a modifier to measure something you would need to do and `afterRender` in the `installModifier` hook.

  * called _before_ the enclosing component's `willDestroy` hook
  * called _after_ any child element's `{{will-destroy}}` modifiers
  * called in definition order in the template
* **May or May Not**
  * be called in the same tick as DOM insertion
  * have the sibling nodes fully initialized in DOM

> Note: These timing semantics were mostly defined in the
> [element modifier manager RFC](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/blob/master/text/0373-Element-Modifier-Managers.md)
> and are repeated here for clarity.

`{{will-destroy}}` receives a function with the following signature as the first
positional parameter:

```ts
type WillDestroyHandler = function(element: Element, ...args): void;
```

The `element` argument is the element that the modifier is applied to, and the
rest of the arguments are any remaining positional parameters passed to
`{{will-destroy}}`. If the first positional parameter is not a callable function,
`{{will-destroy}}` will throw an error. Functions which are passed to this element
modifier will _not_ be bound to any context by default. Users can bind them
using the `(action)` helper:

```hbs
<div {{will-destroy (action this.teardownElement)}}>

> ```

Reviewer 4: I think it would be worth having some examples, either here or in the "How we teach this" section, that cover how you'd model common uses of `didInsertElement` with the new element modifiers. I think there are some particularly cool examples that highlight the benefit of this approach, like conditionals (as already mentioned here) as well as wanting to apply some DOM mutation to multiple items in a list.

Reviewer: In particular, I'm very interested in plans for bridging to a mental model where elements have their own lifecycles, and the interplay with the component's lifecycle around them

i.e., if you have a set of four tabs, each with a D3 visualization, do you really want things torn down and initialized as you go from tab-to-tab? Maybe we need to have some increased emphasis on making good decisions around use of `{{#if`, `visibility: none`, etc... and the ramifications on element lifecycles

> and are repeated here for clarity.

`{{will-destroy}}` receives a function with the following signature as the first
positional parameter:

```ts
type WillDestroyHandler = function(element: Element, ...args): void;
```

The `element` argument is the element that the modifier is applied to, and the
rest of the arguments are any remaining positional parameters passed to
`{{will-destroy}}`. If the first positional parameter is not a callable function,
`{{will-destroy}}` will throw an error. Functions which are passed to this element
modifier will _not_ be bound to any context by default. Users can bind them
using the `(action)` helper:

```hbs
<div {{will-destroy (action this.teardownElement)}}>
```

## How we teach this

Teaching Glimmer components is intrinsically tied to a wider shift in the Ember
programming model - the Ember Octane edition. From a teaching perspective, this
edition will be completely overhauling the guides and updating all of the best
practices as they stand. New users should see Glimmer components as the
_default_, and should not ever have to write a classic component or see one in

> the main guides.

Author: I think we can promise 99% of use cases being covered. The 1% case are cases where class components do things which are strictly more powerful, such as the "render-detector" use case, but these are very rare cases from what we've seen and could generally be solved in other ways (the only truly generic need to detect _any_ render was for positioning using a JS API, and ResizeObserver would have been a better solution).

I don't think we're talking about deprecating classic components just yet, it will be a _long_ time before they are deprecated. But this is a massive overhaul and rebranding effort, and we need to emphasize the new programming model. There _will_ be sections on classic usage, and they will be maintained for the forseeable future.

  the work that would otherwise be done in the `constructor` or `init`

* Expense of class fields - new objects and functions are created for every
  instance, so users should also be careful with them.

### Arguments

For arguments, namespacing makes sense in general as an API choice and is common
in other frameworks (`props` in React, etc.). We should be sure to cover this
thoroughly for users who are used to classic components, but it shouldn't
require too much explaining.

Immutability will be a bigger sticking point in general, in particular the
inability to provide default argument values. This is easy enough to work around
using an `{{or}}` helper in templates:

```hbs
Hello, {{or @firstName "friend"}}!
```

Or a defaulting alias decorator in the class:

```hbs
Hello, {{this.firstName}}!
```
```js
export default class Greeting extends GlimmerComponent {
  @tracked
  get firstName() {
    return this.args.firstName || 'friend';
  }
}
```

But does add a bit of boilerplate to components. Users will also have to be
careful when attempting to override these "defaults" in subclasses, since it is
not as simple as overriding a class field or property. We should guide users to

> use template-only components to "curry" components when trying to provide

Author: This RFC does encourage more template usage in general, from the baseline, but there is still a large amount of choice in what users can do and I don't think it's right to characterize it as pushing a "template-heavy" approach.

Yes, templates will be larger with these changes (that's a given due to outer HTML semantics). And yes, there will be a few more template concepts such as the modifiers that users will be using. This is not a slippery-slope toward writing _all_ app logic within templates though. Users who prefer lighter templates will absolutely still be able to place the majority of their logic within classes.

The changes this RFC _requires_ that make templates heavier are:

1. Outer HTML
2. Render element modifiers

That is not that much. It is a finite amount more per template/component, not a call to convert the whole thing. The changes this RFC _recommends_ that make templates heavier are:

1. Using `{{@args}}` wherever possible/appropriate
2. Using patterns such as partial application in templates for providing defaults

These are suggestions on how to best use the new features, and again are not calls to push all app/business logic into the template.

defaults in subclasses instead, leveraging the outer HTML semantics of

> Glimmer components:

Author: There are alternatives, absolutely, and we should discuss them. Specifically, using defaulting aliases on the component class, and overriding the defaults in subclasses.

This solution is the "cleanest" one to me, and from what I understand will also be the most performant one at scale since TO components incur so little overhead. It does require us to add `...arguments` to make it truly ergonomic, and we're definitely punting on that until after Octane.

```hbs
<!-- components/button.hbs -->
<button class="button {{@type}}">
  <i class="icon {{@type}}"></i>
  {{yield}}
</button>
```
```hbs
<!-- component/success-button.hbs -->
<Button @type="success">{{yield}}</Button>
```
```hbs
<!-- component/danger-button.hbs -->
<Button @type="danger">{{yield}}</Button>
```

#### Lifecycle hooks and properties

> For new users, and users of other frameworks, lifecycle hooks will be very

Author: Users without framework experience, will ammend

minimal and fairly easy to understand. The lack of render hooks may be the more
difficult part to understand, and we'll have to lean on the documentation for
element modifiers and make sure that is _really_ excellent to get the concepts

> there across.

Author: Actually, I think that native custom elements really capture this perfectly. They have _no sub components_, and they are effectively _real DOM elements_. They are aligned with the browser, and so are modifiers.

Modifiers are running code by directly connecting it to where it is concerned, instead of through some arbitrary boundary point. We are ensuring correctness of code through correctness of _form_ in the template language.

In the future, we also plan on allowing modifiers to work with components, so users will have more flexibility with them:

```hbs
<Button {{did-render this.setupButton}}></Button>
```

If we accept that modifiers _will_ be a major concept in Ember, then I think it makes perfect sense that they also become _the_ concept which allows users to interact with the DOM directly.

themselves. The underlying library for this is [here](https://github.com/miguelcobain/ember-composability-tools).
This is a simplified example of how you could accomplish this with Glimmer
components and element modifiers.

Node component:

```js
// components/node.js
export default class NodeComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  children = new Set();

  constructor() {
    super(...arguments);

    this.args.parent.registerChild(this);
  }

  willDestroy() {
    super(...arguments);

    this.args.parent.unregisterChild(this);
  }

  registerChild(child) {
    this.children.add(child);
  }

  unregisterChild(child) {
    this.children.delete(child);
  }

  didInsertNode(element) {
    // library setup code goes here

    this.children.forEach(c => c.didInsertNode(element));
  }

  willDestroyNode(element) {
    // library teardown code goes here

    this.children.forEach(c => c.willDestroyNode(element));
  }
}
```
```hbs
<!-- components/node.hbs -->
{{yield (component "node" parent=this)}}
```

Root component:

```js
// components/root.js
export default class RootComponent extends NodeComponent {}
```
```hbs
<!-- components/root.hbs -->

> <div

Author: I've done a lot of diving through addon code and open source app code, and so far we have found exactly one usage that requires the behavior you're describing. We have an escape hatch for that required behavior (write a component manager that can be used to make a render detector), so I think it's reasonable to say we're covering most use cases effectively.

- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Ember Issue: (leave this empty)

# Glimmer Components

## Summary

Glimmer components are a simpler, more ergonomic, and more declarative approach
to building components. They represent the sum of multiple years of design and
feature work by the community, which stemmed from the original RFCs and
discussions surrounding "angle-bracket components".

This RFC proposes adding Glimmer components to Ember's public API, and making
them the default new app experience in Ember Octane.

## First, a Bit of History

As components became the standard for Single Page Apps (SPAs) several years
ago, and the Ember community began adopting them in earnest and converting from
Ember 1's primarily MVC oriented approach, there were many small and large

> issues that cropped up with Ember's component API and usage: `{{curly-bracket}}`

Reviewer 4: This formatting of the list of issues is non-standard, as far as I can tell. Grammatically, I think you'd better off replacing the semicolons with commas. Additionally, the word after a semicolon shouldn't be capitalized unless it's a proper noun.

Reviewer 4: Actually, on re-reading, I understand why you went for semicolons here, but the point about capitalizing the word after a semicolon still stands.

> syntax felt dated with the introduction of Polymer and other major frameworks;

Reviewer 4: I think credit for this should go to Web Components, not Polymer.

the inability to specify or override HTML attributes led to API explosions; The

> implicit wrapper element and customization fields (`tagName`, `classNames`, et.

Reviewer 4: `et. al.` should just be `et al.` (no period after `et`)

Glimmer components are the final piece of that puzzle. They include the last
of the major features that were discussed during the original Angle Brackets
RFC, and holistically those features make a much simpler and more ergonomic
component API. Taken alone, they are an incremental change. Their individual
features aren't _that_ much more than what we currently have in Ember today. But
as a whole they represent the culmination of multiple years of design work and
discussion by the Ember community, and the collective attention to detail and
care of all of our community members.

## Terminology

* The **Glimmer VM** is the underlying rendering engine which is used by
  _Ember.js_ and _Glimmer.js_.
* **Glimmer.js** is a thin wrapper on top of the _Glimmer VM_ which exposes a
  much simpler API compared to Ember. Historically it has been used to prove out
  ideas and implementations before bringing them into Ember via RFC, and has
  been used to write applications which don't require the full feature set of
  Ember.
* **Glimmer components** are a newly proposed component API which draw from the
  experimental APIs provided in Glimmer.js, and Ember.js via

>   `sparkles-component`.

Reviewer 6: Given that there is an implementation, should a benchmark comparison be provided? Maybe a dbmon with legacy vs sparkles?

always be able to refer to `this.args` as the canonical state of the values
passed to the component invocation.

Immutable arguments make reasoning about the state of a component simpler ("Was
that a user provided value or a default/mutated/computed value?" becomes "Was it
an argument or not?"), and encourages use of `{{@arg}}` syntax in templates
where appropriate. At scale, this makes reading templates even easier, since
more information is encoded in the template itself.

### Minimal Classes

Legacy components are _large_ classes, with lots of built up functionality and
debt from over the years. The total list of default properties and hooks
(including inherited ones) includes:

* **13** Standard lifecycle hooks, such as
  `didInsertElement`/`willDestroyElement` and `didUpdate`.
* **29** Event handlers, such as `click`, `mouseEnter`, and `dragStart`.
* **9** element/element customization properties, such as `element` and
  `tagName`.
* **21** standard framework functions, such as `get`/`set`,
  `addObserver`/`removeObserver` and `toggleProperty`.

Coming from a class hierarchy that is 4 levels deep (`Component` -> `CoreView`

> -> `EmberObject` -> `CoreObject`, with a number mixins included along the way).

Reviewer 6: It may be worth saying that Ember.Component has like 10-20 mixins or so. (Checking emberaddons.com, it looks like its 19.....)

better components in Ember, those components will also be cross-compatible with
Glimmer apps (assuming they don't use Ember specific functionality).

It is important to note that while Glimmer components will be versioned
independently from Glimmer and Ember ***they will abide by the Ember RFC process
for any and all changes to user APIs***. The implementations for their component
managers in Glimmer and Ember may change to keep them compatible, but they will
not make major changes without first getting community input, and will be
considered part of the public API of Ember.

## Prior Art

* [Glimmer.js](https://glimmerjs.com/) is the framework that this component API
  is based on, and will be cross-compatible with.
* [sparkles-component](https://github.com/rwjblue/sparkles-component) is an
  an implementation of the Glimmer.js component API using Ember's component
  managers. It is usable in Ember today.

## Detailed design

Glimmer components have the following API:

```ts
class GlimmerComponent<Args> {
  constructor(injections: object, public args: Args);

  didCreate(): void;
  didUpdate(): void;

  destroy(): void;
}
```

> In addition, two new element modifiers will fill in the gaps left by the

Reviewer 6: I'm assuming that element modifiers can be applied to other glimmer components, ala:

```
<parent-component>
  <child-component {{on-insert this.childDidUpdate}} />
<parent-component>
```

Author: I don't believe so, based on the current [modifiers RFC](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/353/files#diff-8b3eda7c0c2bc69ef34db57bd02fd749R248), it looks like they can only be invoked on actual elements and will result in a compiler error if used on components.

`didInsertElement` and `willDestroyElement` lifecycle hooks:

> * `{{on-insert}}`

Reviewer 4: Dasherized helpers look out of place with everything else camelized. I'm thinking we should call these `onInsert` and `onDestroy`, and update other template helpers to follow a similar convention in a separate RFC.

* `{{on-destroy}}`

Finally, Glimmer components will diverge from standard Ember components in one
major way - untracked properties (non-computed, non-tracked, and not named args)
will never update. This means that changes caused by `notifyPropertyChange` and
`set` will not be picked up, unless they go through one of the above methods
for tracking.

### Constructor

> The constructor for Glimmer components receives two arguments: An injections

Reviewer 6: does the GlimmerComponent's constructor assert that these arguments are passed, or are they optional?

Author: It should probably assert I think, it would be pretty bad if injections were not passed to super. Args is less bad, but I still think it would be pretty bad since it invalidates our invariant (args always === invocation args)

the named arguments object. Both of these arguments should conventionally be
passed to `super` immediately, and then accessed through decorated service
properties, `getOwner`, and `this.args` respectively:

```js
class PersonComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @service profile;

  constructor() {
    super(...arguments);

    let owner = getOwner(this);
    let profileService = this.profile;

    let firstName = this.args.firstName;
  }
}
```

These arguments are passed to the constructor so that they can be used for
initial setup of the component. Since Glimmer components do not have an `init`
hook, and they do not have `willRender`/`willInsertElement`, the constructor is
only method for setting up the initial state of the component before the first
render.

Service injections and args being available in this way is very useful because
it also makes them available to class field initializers:

```js
class PersonComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @service time;

  // Use the values of args in an initializer
  fullName = `${this.args.firstName} ${this.args.lastName}`;

  // Access a service in an initializer
  currentTime = this.time.now();
}
```

> Both of these arguments will be frozen in development mode to prevent changes

Reviewer 6: are they deeply frozen or shallowly frozen?

Author: shallow, 100%, will add a note

  only run during _one_ phase.

* "Bookend" methods (`did*` and `will*`) can be confusing, since they require
  some specific knowledge of what the "bookended" functionality is. For
  instance, users almost _always_ want to use `didInsertElement` and
  `willDestroyElement`, but the existence of their opposite bookends can make
  this confusing. Additionally, the fact that `didReceiveAttrs` and
  `didUpdateAttrs` do _not_ have opposing bookends is inconsistent with this
  pattern.

* Hooks that run immediately _before_ a render such as `didUpdateAttrs` are not
  particularly useful, because the only functionality they have which
  post-render methods do not is to modify a bound value without triggering a
  rerender:

  ```js
  willUpdateAttrs() {
    if (this.someBoolArg) {
      this.set('someBoundValue', true);
    }
  }
  ```

  These types of values can almost always be better expressed using computed
  properties, which will update when accessed during render, preventing
  rerenders. Conversely, much imperative logic _must_ be done after a render
  (manipulating an element directly, for instance), so post render hooks are
  the most sensible.

> * The element based methods can be removed in favor of element modifiers,

Reviewer 6: ya, this approach really does remove a large amount of complexity. Want to wait for x-child to be added/removed, simply use a modifier directly on it.

  which are discussed later on.

Based on these considerations, we can reduce these hooks to one per major phase
of the component's lifecycle:

The **`constructor`** can be used for initial setup of the component. This
effectively replaces `init`, and allows users to setup state before _any_
renders occur.

> **`didCreate`** runs after the first full render of the component, once the

Reviewer 6: does full render here include its descendants? The RFC here may want to really lock this down.

Reviewer 6: Is this invoked depth first, or breadth first, top -> down, or bottom -> up?

Reviewer 6: I see, bellow you do elaborate on the ordering. Should section then link to that, or maybe hint that it will be addressed?

component has been fully created. It is closest to `didInsertElement` in legacy
components, but has been renamed since components no longer have an `element`
property.

> **`didUpdate`** runs after the component has been updated, including all changes

Reviewer 6: what does update mean exactly, does it mean the  values are updated, and not rendered, or does it mean rendered, or does it mean all rendering through to its descends have completed? The RFC here may want to really lock this down.

Reviewer 6: Is this invoked depth first, or breadth first, top -> down, or bottom -> up?

Reviewer 6: I see, bellow you do elaborate on the ordering. Should section then link to that, or maybe hint that it will be addressed?

Author: I think we can address it here. `didUpdate` does mix some concerns at the moment, it is invoked in two distinct situations:

* `args` were changed, whether or not this caused a rerender
* A rerender occured.

In both cases, it occurs _immediately_ after the rerender has finished for this component, so all child rerenders/`didUpdate`s have finished (at least in my experimentation). I don't think we can/should specify ordering relative to siblings, but I think spelling this out would be good (we can do the same for `didCreate`)

to `args` and any other changes which trigger a rerender of the component (i.e.
computed properties being invalidated). It is effectively the same as
`didUpdate` in legacy components, and can be used for update code.

> **`destroy`** is when the component is being destroyed, and can be used for

Reviewer 6: Is this invoked depth first, or breadth first, top -> down, or bottom -> up?

Reviewer 6: I see, bellow you do elaborate on the ordering. Should section then link to that, or maybe hint that it will be addressed?

cleanup code.

Between these hooks and tracked/computed properties, users have replacements for
all of the functionality provided by the legacy component hooks, with as little
an API surface as possible to learn and remember.

> ### Element Modifiers

Reviewer 6: is it possible to provide additional arguments to Element Modifiers, something like?

```hbs
<div {{on-insert this.someMethod this.someValue}} />
```

```js
function someMethod(element, someValue) {

}
```

Author: so I was discussing this with @krisselden and @chadhietala, and we came to the conclusion that _yes_ it should, and we should also rerun whenever these args update. So, `{{on-insert}}` should probably be renamed to something like `{{on-render}}` or `{{did-render}}` since it can update.

> ### Element Modifiers

Reviewer 6: How do element modifiers such as `on-insert` behave if their first argument is not callable? Do they error, are they silent, to they guard against invoking a non-callable once invoked?

Author: Absolutely should throw, will make a note of this

Glimmer components have outer HTML semantics, which means that whatever is put
in the template is what we see in the final render. This also means that they
can have _multiple_ root elements:

```hbs
<div ...attributes>
  First root element
</div>
<div>
  Second root element
</div>
```

It is also possible that there are _no_ root elements:

```hbs
This is a text only component: {{@foo}}
```

This makes the `element` property of legacy components awkward, since there is
no one single reference-able element. A previous proposal for solving this
problem was a `bounds` property which contained `firstNode` and `lastNode`, but

> this could be very confusing to users since these nodes would likely have to be

Author: To be fair I think this is also true of `didInsertElement` style components too, you would have to create a component within the `if` to get a solid place to contain lifecycle hooks.

```js
let { firstNode, lastNode } = bounds;
let currentNode = firstNode;

while (currentNode !== lastNode) {
  // do something with current node
  currentNode = currentNode.nextSibling;
}
```

This exposes users to low level APIs which may be useful to some, but in general
are too complicated and nuanced. Instead, we can use new element modifiers which
allow users to run code declaratively on the element:

```hbs
<div {{on-insert this.didInsertElement}} ...attributes>
  First root element
</div>
<div {{on-insert this.didInsertElement}}>
  Second root element
</div>
```

This allows users to target which elements they care about directly. It also
allows for code to be run on elements which are contained in conditionals,
meaning users do not need to add messy logic to track component state
themselves:

```hbs
{{#if shouldRender}}
  <div
    {{on-insert this.didInsertElement}}
    {{on-destroy this.willDestroyElement}}
  >

  </div>
{{/if}}
```

Finally, it means that users can bypass component code altogether by using
helpers:

```hbs
<div {{on-insert (setScrollPosition @savedScrollPosition)}}></div>
```

This RFC proposes adding two element modifiers:

> 1. `{{on-insert}}`, which runs immediately after the element is inserted.

Reviewer 6: Is it fair to say, `on-insert` runs top-down?

Author: I believe this is bottom up? All child `{{on-insert}}`s will run before the parent does

   `{{on-insert}}` is guaranteed to run before the enclosing component's

>    `didCreate` and `didUpdate` hooks, and after any child element's

Reviewer 6: are `didCreate` and `didUpdate` run `top-down` or `bottom up`?

Author: I think in all cases it will be bottom up

Reviewer 2: The timing semantics are specified in the Element Modifier Manager RFC https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/blob/master/text/0373-Element-Modifier-Managers.md#modifier-lifecycle

   `{{on-insert}}` modifiers, preserving the semantics of `didInsertElement`.

   `{{on-insert}}` receives a function with the following signature:

   ```ts
   type OnInsertHandler = function(element: Element): void;
   ```

> 2. `{{on-destroy}}`, which runs immediately before the element is removed.

Reviewer 6: is it fair to say `on-destroy` runs `bottom-up`?

   `{{on-destroy}}` is guaranteed to run before the enclosing component's
   `didUpdate` and `destroy` hooks, and after and child element's
   `{{on-destroy}}` modifiers, preserving the semantics of `willDestroyElement`.

   `{{on-destroy}}` receives a function with the following signature:

   ```ts
   type OnDestroyHandler = function(element: Element): void;
   ```

#### Default Binding of Functions

Currently, the `{{action}}` modifier is the only modifier which ships with
Ember, and `{{action}}` by default binds functions to the context of the
_component_. With nested values, this behavior does not particularly make sense:

```hbs
<div {{on-insert this.animationService.registerElement}}></div>
```

In this example, `on-insert` would effectively be running

> `this.animationService.registerElement.call(this, element)`, where `this` refers

Reviewer 6: this smells of a demeter violation.

Author: Yeah, I've been mulling this one over all night. It's tricky.

From a purely functional standpoint, binding implicitly doesn't make sense and it's definitely just a convenience. However, there is precedent in the `{{action}}` modifier:

```js
<button {{action this.func}}>Click Me!</button>
```

This binds `this.func` to the `this` context of the template implicitly. So, a `bind` helper that does the same doesn't seem like much of a stretch.

It doesn't generalize well though. If folks end up making their own modifiers, there isn't a great API to provide them both the passed in functions _and_ the context for _each_ function:

```js
<button {{custom-modifier this.foo.func this.bar.func}}></button>
```

And eagerly binding these functions seems like a bad idea.

The other side I've been thinking about coming at this from is binding in class definitions:

```js
class AnimationService {
  @autobind
  registerElement() {}
}
```

Which I think is probably more efficient, but also requires more understanding from the user. It's a bigger mental model shift.

Reviewer 3: I think the safest thing for now is to say that the functions are called unbound. Unfortunately, that makes the feature somewhat troll-y... 🤔

Author: It's a bit less troll-y than when the `{{action}}` modifier needed to be bound too:

```hbs
<button {{action (action this.func)}} />
```

At least people can reason that `onRender` is different than `action`, and they have separate functionality.

to the _component_ and not the _animation service_.

> The `bind` RFC, which runs parallel to this one, proposes that a new helper with

Reviewer 6: if this RFC is already up, we should link to it.

Author: It is not yet written, but it will be up and published before this _if_ we end up going through with it. Going to be thinking it over in the next few days.

the opposite semantics be introduced. If the `bind` RFC is accepted before this
RFC is implemented, then the default behavior when using `on-insert` should

> match with the `bind` helper, and _not_ the `action` helper.

Reviewer 6: Q: would landing the `bind` helper after the fact, "upgrade" this behavior? Or will that ship have sailed, if so do we want a dependency or is it fine to proceed in any order.

Author: There are a few options here:

1. Modifiers could _not_ bind, so `{{on-insert (action this.didInsert)}}` would be required.
2. Modifiers could throw if they detect that they are chaining, so `{{on-insert this.foo.didInsert}}` would throw, but `{{on-insert this.didInsert}}` would not.
3. Modifiers can adopt `{{action}}`s binding mechanics.

Options 1 and 2 allow us to define this behavior later, option 3 locks us in. I think 1 and 2 would both be acceptable to remove the dependency

bound from a template, and can be updated using Ember's `set` function:

```hbs
{{this.count}}

<button onclick={{action this.incrementCount}}>
  Increment
</button>
```
```js
export default Component.extend({
  count: 0,

  incrementCount() {
    this.set('count', this.count + 1);
  }
});
```

By contrast, Glimmer components will require that users opt-in to change
tracking for all values in the component. The following code would _not_ update:

```hbs
{{this.count}}

<button onclick={{action this.incrementCount}}>
  Increment
</button>
```
```js
export default class CounterComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  count = 0;

  incrementCount() {
    this.set('count', this.count + 1);
  }
}
```

In order to get this code working, users would have to explicitly mark this code
as tracked. There are 2 ways to do this:

1. Turn `count` into a computed property
2. Turn count into a tracked property (as proposed in the Tracked Properties RFC)

With computed properties, this would look like:

```js
export default class CounterComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @computed('_count')
  get count() {
    return this._count;
  }

  incrementCount() {

>     this.set('_count', this.count + 1);

Reviewer 6: semi orthogonal, but I suspect the tracked RFC (or maybe some short/medium term effort) may want to promote computed properties to also having a setter, that way `this.set` would not need to be used in this scenario. This will likely easy transition pains, especially for addon authors.

bullet points here are:

* `didCreate` is `didInsertElement`, without elements
* `didUpdate` is the same as it is in legacy components
* `destroy` is the correct place for all teardown code
* `didReceiveAttrs`, `willRender`, and `didRender` code should generally be
  extracted into a separate method called by both `didCreate` and `didUpdate`.
* Any code that may cause a rerender in `didUpdate` or `didCreate` should
  ideally be pushed into getters or helpers, so that it naturally is pulled into
  the render instead of imperatively updated.

**Property tracking** will be the most difficult change to understand in some
regards, and will rely on dialing in the teaching for the mechanics of tracked
properties (discussed in the tracked properties RFC).

## Drawbacks

The major drawback to Glimmer components is that they add a separate API for
components, meaning that for the forseeable future Ember users will likely
need to learn how to use both interchangeably. This introduces a fair amount of
mental overhead for users, but the benefits of Glimmer components and their
simplicity should make this less problematic.

## Alternatives

### No owner in constructor

> Sparkles components do not provide access to the owner or injections in the

Reviewer 3: I just haven't implemented yet because it wasn't part of the "reference implementation" in glimmer.js. Sparkles will absolutely be updated (soon) to pass the owner in to the constructor so that other types of injections (e.g. `@service`) function properly.

constructor, though it is a requested feature. We could add a `willCreate` or
`init` hook which allows users to setup the instance before the first render.

Alternatively, the exact method by which the owner is passed to the constructor
can be changed (on an object vs directly) or all injections could be passed,
enabling typed injections.

### More/different lifecycle hooks

The proposed lifecycle hooks are significantly more minimal than in legacy
components. This API space could always be added to in future RFCs, but it may
be too small to start with. In particular, lacking an equivalent to `willUpdate`

> and `didUpdateAttrs` means that some users may be forced into triggering a

Reviewer 3: I actually think that `didUpdateAttrs` is quite easy to implement in the current design.

```js
export default class extends Component {
  get args() {
    return this._args;
  }

  set args(args) {
    let lastArgs = this._args;
    this._args = args;

    // do whatever you need to do...
  }
}
```

instance and the named arguments object. Both of these arguments should
conventionally be passed to `super` immediately, and then accessed through
decorated service properties, `getOwner`, and `this.args` respectively:

```js
class PersonComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @service profile;

  constructor() {
    super(...arguments);

    let owner = getOwner(this);
    let profileService = this.profile;

    let firstName = this.args.firstName;
  }
}
```

These arguments are passed to the constructor so that they can be used for
initial setup of the component. Since Glimmer components do not have an `init`
hook, and they do not have `willRender`/`willInsertElement`, the constructor is
only method for setting up the initial state of the component before the first
render.

Service injections and args being available in this way is very useful because
it also makes them available to class field initializers:

```js
class PersonComponent extends GlimmerComponent {
  @service time;

  // Use the values of args in an initializer
  fullName = `${this.args.firstName} ${this.args.lastName}`;

  // Access a service in an initializer
  currentTime = this.time.now();
}
```

> The `args` argument will be shallow frozen in development mode to prevent users

Reviewer 3: shallow -> shallowly?

### Namespaced Arguments

In classic components, arguments are set as properties directly on the class,

> and. This means that class methods and properties can be completely overwritten

Reviewer 3: `and.` seems _slightly_ odd

By contrast, service getters (decorated with `@service`) clearly and explicitly
state the dependencies of a class within the its definition. This is marginally
more work, but the benefit of having an explicit dependencies list within each
class has proven to be invaluable in practice since `inject.service()` was
introduced.

> Glimmer components will only receive the owner directly, and as such will _not_

Reviewer 3: 👍

ahead of time.

By contrast, service getters (decorated with `@service`) clearly and explicitly
state the dependencies of a class within its definition. This is marginally more
work, but the benefit of having an explicit dependencies list within each class
has proven to be invaluable in practice since `inject.service()` was introduced.

Glimmer components will only receive the owner directly, and as such will _not_
support type injections. This cuts down on the implicit knowledge developers
must have when writing a component.

### Properties

Glimmer components have 3 properties: `args`, `isDestroying`, and `isDestroyed`.

#### `args`

As discussed in the motivation section, `args` is an object with the values of
the named arguments passed to the component. This property will be updated
whenever the arguments change, with the `onUpdate` hook being called after any

> updates. It will be shallow frozen in development mode to prevent users from

Reviewer 3: shallow -> shallowly?

  pattern.

* Hooks which are used to manipulate elements or the DOM in general can be
  removed in favor of element modifiers, which are discussed in detail in the
  next section.

Based on these considerations, we can reduce these hooks to one per major phase
of the component's lifecycle: the `constructor`, `onUpdate`, and `onDestroy`.

#### `constructor`

The `constructor` method can be used for initial setup of the component. This
effectively replaces `init`, and allows users to setup state before _any_
renders occur. It has the following timing semantics:

* **Always**
  * called when a component is created
  * called _before_ any child components are created

#### `onUpdate`

This hook runs after the component's `args` have been updated, allowing users to
run any code they need in order to react to changes external to the component.
This is particularly useful for running asynchronous code based on the value of
an argument, such as `fetch` requests or ember-concurrency style tasks. It has
the following timing semantics:

* **Always**
  * called when `args` have changed
  * called _before_ any child component `onUpdate` hooks

> * **May or May Not**

Reviewer 3: Should also state that it may be called even if the contents are stable (e.g. we _guarantee_ it will be called if they are updated, but it may be called if they aren't too...)

  * be called in a stable order relative to sibling component `onUpdate` hooks

#### `onDestroy`

This hook runs when the component is being destroyed, and can be used for
cleanup code. It has the following timing semantics:

* **Always**
  * called when a component is removed
  * called _before_ any child component `onDestroy` hooks
  * called _after_ `isDestroying` has been set to `true`, and _before_
    `isDestroyed` has been set to `true`
* **May or May Not**
  * be called in a stable order relative to sibling component `onDestroy`
    hooks

>   * be called on the same tick in which the component is removed from the DOM

Reviewer 3: I'd tweak this slightly to be a bit more forceful RE: the relationship to DOM.

<div {{on-render setScrollPosition @scrollPosition}}></div>
```

This RFC proposes adding two element modifiers: `{{on-render}}` and
`{{on-destroy}}`.

#### `{{on-render}}`

This modifier runs immediately after the element is inserted, and again whenever

> any of the arguments passed to it update. It has the following timing semantics:

Reviewer 3: Do we consider functions stable? Does `{{on-render (some-helper)}}` get called again (after initial render) if `some-helper` recomputes?

Author: yup, it will. Good to call that out specifically probably, but if _any_ of the arguments changes at all, it will rerun.
